v0.14.0 changelog (#2351)
PennyLaneAI/catalyst: doc/releases/changelog-0.14.0.md

  [(#2145)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2145)
  [(#2233)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2233)
  [(#2284)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2284)
  [(#2296)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2296)
  [(#2336)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2336)

  :class:`~.PauliRot` and :func:`~.pauli_measure` can be manipulated with Catalyst's existing passes
  for PPR-PPM compilation, which includes :func:`catalyst.passes.to_ppr`,
  :func:`catalyst.passes.commute_ppr`, :func:`catalyst.passes.merge_ppr_ppm`,
  :func:`catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm`, :func:`catalyst.passes.reduce_t_depth`, 
  :func:`catalyst.passes.decompose_arbitrary_ppr` and :func:`catalyst.passes.ppm_compilation`.
  
  For most use cases, it is recommended to ensure that PennyLane's program capture is enabled, 
  :func:`pennylane.capture.enable`, and to call the above compilation passes from the PennyLane 

>   frontend (e.g., ``qml.transforms.ppr_to_ppm`` instead of from ``catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm``).

Reviewer: Just curious, is there a difference between the two?

Reviewer 2: Isaac and I chatted about this today, we decided that `qml.transforms.ppr_to_ppm` will reside in the PL docs https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8783, and catalyst docs will just have the catalyst frontend, aka `catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm`.

Originally I was also on the side of "we should advertise `qml.blah`", but what swayed me to the other side was that, even though we have things like control flow intergrated in plxpr path now, we still show `catalyst.for_loop` on the documentation.

Reviewer 2: I think regarding documentation, eventually what should happen is:
- PL documentation is for frontend
- catalyst documentation is purely for compiler (i.e. just the dialects) (maybe runtime, but the future of runtime is not clear now)

But that requires capture work / maybe the new direct lowering of plxpr to ref dialect to complete. In the meantime, maybe it's still a good idea to document catalyst's own frontend.

Reviewer 2: Also, https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2296

Author: > mean for the user applying the transform, using qml.transforms.ppr_to_ppm vs catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm is the same? What is the recommendation based on then?

Better integration with the program capture pipeline, mostly 😅. But, also to move people to the PL frontend for the reasons Paul said. The PL documentation should be the source of truth for users (where possible), catalyst documentation should eventually just be for compiler stuff

Reviewer: Sounds good, I'm a bit confused because it sounds like Paul is saying the catalyst docs (i.e. this changelog) should use the catalyst functions

> Isaac and I chatted about this today, we decided that qml.transforms.ppr_to_ppm will reside in the PL docs https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8783, and catalyst docs will just have the catalyst frontend, aka catalyst.passes.ppr_to_ppm.

but I'll leave it to you to figure out if you want to make any edits here.

  qml.capture.enable()

  @qml.qjit(target="mlir")

>   @partial(qml.transforms.ppm_compilation, decompose_method="auto-corrected")

Author: should be doable with this release!

      # equivalent to a T gate
      qml.PauliRot(jnp.pi / 4, pauli_word="Z", wires=0)

      return 
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> print(qml.specs(circuit, level=2)())
  Device: null.qubit
  Device wires: 3
  Shots: Shots(total=None)
  Level: 2

  Resource specifications:
    Total wire allocations: 18
    Total gates: 52
    Circuit depth: Not computed

    Gate types:

>       MultiRZ: 7

Reviewer: The other question is what is the intention of this example, what do we want to show?  The use of specs is not really clear to me.

      ppm = qml.pauli_measure(pauli_word="YYZ", wires=[0, 2, 1])

>       return qml.expval(qml.Z(0))

Author: We can return `qml.measure`... but that's not the way we want to do things going forward 😅. Idk, having empty returns looks/feels very strange.

>       return qml.expval(qml.Z(0))

Author: I have a dozen things to keep track of right now sorry 😅 

For examples with ppm_compilation and commute_ppr, I'll return nothing!

  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> print(qml.specs(circuit, level=2)())
  Device: null.qubit
  Device wires: 3

>   Shots: Shots(total=None)

Reviewer: Wow didn't this printed so nicely, is that new?

Author: yes!

  Level: 2

  Resource specifications:
    Total wire allocations: 9
    Total gates: 23
    Circuit depth: Not computed

    Gate types:
      PPM: 16
      PPR-pi/2: 6
      qec.fabricate: 1

    Measurements:
      expval(PauliZ): 1
  ```

  As the circuits generated by these pass are currently not executable on any backend, ensure that 
  ``target="mlir"`` is in the ``qjit`` decorator for clear and inspectable results. Compiled 
  circuits expressed in terms of :class:`~.PauliRot` and :func:`~.pauli_measure` for Pauli-based 

>   computation can only be analyzed with the ``null.qubit`` device.

Reviewer 2: It does! (I just tried with lightning)

* An informative error is now raised if a transform is applied inside of a ``qjit``'d QNode when 
  PennyLane's program capture is enabled.
  [(#2256)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2256)

  ```python
  @qml.qjit
  @qml.qnode(qml.device('lightning.qubit', wires=1))
  @qml.transforms.cancel_inverses
  def c():
      qml.X(0)
      qml.X(0)
      return qml.probs()
  ```
  
  ```pycon
  >>> c()
  NotImplementedError: transforms cannot currently be applied inside a QNode.
  ```

* A new ``"changed"`` option has been added to the ``keep_intermediate`` parameter of
  :func:`~.qjit`. This option saves intermediate IR files after each pass, but only when the IR is 
  actually modified by the pass. Additionally, intermediate IR files are now organized into 
  subdirectories for each compilation stage when using ``keep_intermediate="changed"`` or 
  ``keep_intermediate="pass"``. These changes culminate in better IR file management.
  [(#2186)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2186)

* Resource tracking with :func:`pennylane.specs` now includes ``qml.StatePrep`` operations.
  [(#2230)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2230)

> * Resource tracking with :func:`pennylane.specs` now tracks dynamic wire allocation 

Reviewer: nit: Combine with the above?

  PennyLane's program capture is enabled. When compiling with ``qml.qjit(autograph=True)``, the 
  decomposition rules returned by the graph-based framework are now correctly compiled using 
  Autograph. This ensures compatibility and deeper optimization for dynamically generated
  decomposition rules.
  [(#2161)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2161)

* The decomposition of ``qml.MultiRZ`` operations with an arbitrary number of wires is now supported
  at the MLIR level with graph-based decompositions enabled and PennyLane's program capture enabled. 
  [(#2160)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2160)

* A new option called ``use_nameloc`` has been added to :func:`~.qjit` that embeds variable names
  from Python into the compiler IR, which can make it easier to read when debugging programs.
  [(#2054)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2054)

* Compilation passes registered in PennyLane via ``@qml.transform`` can now take in optional keyword
  arguments when used with :func:`~.qjit` and when PennyLane's program capture is enabled.
  [(#2154)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2154)

> * Pytree inputs can now be used when PennyLane's program capture is enabled.

Reviewer: I think it would also be nice to regroup the program capture improvements, since there are quite a few.

* The decomposition of ``qml.MultiRZ`` operations with an arbitrary number of wires is now supported
  at the MLIR level with graph-based decompositions enabled and PennyLane's program capture enabled. 
  [(#2160)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2160)

* A new option called ``use_nameloc`` has been added to :func:`~.qjit` that embeds variable names
  from Python into the compiler IR, which can make it easier to read when debugging programs.
  [(#2054)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2054)

* Compilation passes registered in PennyLane via ``@qml.transform`` can now take in optional keyword
  arguments when used with :func:`~.qjit` and when PennyLane's program capture is enabled.
  [(#2154)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2154)

* Pytree inputs can now be used when PennyLane's program capture is enabled.
  [(#2165)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2165)

* ``qml.grad`` and ``qml.jacobian`` can now be used with ``qjit`` when PennyLane's program capture 
  is enabled.
  [(#2078)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2078)

* Dynamically allocated wires (:func:`pennylane.allocate`) can now be passed into control flow 

>   blocks and subroutines.

Reviewer: No it never left the prototype stage, so it's not documented or properly tested. It is an item on the IR improvements proposal though.

<h3>Breaking changes 💔</h3>

* The MLIR pipeline ``enforce-runtime-invariants-pipeline`` has been restructured and a new pipeline
  called ``quantum-compilation-pipeline`` has been added. Existing quantum compilation passes in the 
  ``quantum-compilation-pipeline`` are now run together with user-provided quantum compilation 
  passes (previously run in ``enforce-runtime-invariants``). This new combined pipeline now runs 
  first.

>   [(#2186)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2186)

Author: @dime10 how's this?

Reviewer: Better!

  - The Enzyme version has been updated to
  [v0.0.203](https://github.com/EnzymeAD/Enzyme/releases/tag/v0.0.203).

* The ``remove-chained-self-inverse`` pass has been renamed to ``cancel-inverses`` to better
  conform with the name of the corresponding transform in PennyLane.
  [(#2201)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2201)

<h3>Deprecations 👋</h3>

No deprecations have been made in this release.

<h3>Bug fixes 🐛</h3>

* Updated the type support for callbacks allowing for the use of unsigned integers.
  [(#2330)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2330)

* Fixed a bug in the ``catalyst.python_interface.pass_api.TranformInterpreterPass`` pass that 
  prevented pass options from being used correctly.
  [(#2289)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2289)

> * The experimental xDSL :func:`~catalyst.python_interface.transforms.diagonalize_measurements`

Reviewer: I think it's because at some point we moved all the xDSL code to Catalyst, and the PRs that had gone in for it this development cycle are now listed here 🤔

> * The experimental xDSL :func:`~catalyst.python_interface.transforms.diagonalize_measurements`

Author: @mudit2812 can confirm

>   - The Enzyme version has been updated to

Reviewer: Not sure what your question is, I'm just saying there is too much info here and we should remove this sentence: 
```
Enzyme now targets `v0.0.203` with the build target `EnzymeStatic-22`, and the nanobind
  requirement for the latest LLVM has been updated to version 2.9.
```

(can't suggest it directly as it's out of range)

>   - The Enzyme version has been updated to

Author: Yeah I removed the sentence haha

    [(#2261)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2261)

  * Added a "Unified Compiler Cookbook" RST file, along with tutorials, to `catalyst.python_interface.doc`,
    which provides a quickstart guide for getting started with xDSL and its integration with PennyLane and
    Catalyst.
    [(#8571)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8571)

  * xDSL passes are now automatically detected when using the `qjit` decorator.
    This removes the need to pass the `pass_plugins` argument to the `qjit` decorator.
    [(#2169)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2169)
    [(#2183)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2183)

  * The ``mlir_opt`` property now correctly handles xDSL passes by automatically
    detecting when the Python compiler is being used and routing through it appropriately.
    [(#2190)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2190)

  * A new experimental ``parity_synth_pass`` compiler pass has been added to
    ``catalyst.python_interface.transforms``. This pass groups ``CNOT`` and ``RZ`` operators
    into phase polynomials and re-synthesizes them into ``CNOT`` and ``RZ`` operators again.

>     [(#2294)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2294)

Author: Should we add an example here?

Reviewer: Then it can't be internal. Internal changes are things that shouldn't affect users in any way but we include them anyway because they are code changes to the released package.

  // ... use %4
  ```

* Fixed an issue with :func:`~.passes.commute_ppr` and :func:`~.passes.merge_ppr_ppm` where they

>   were incorrectly moving nullary operations. This also improves the compilation time by reducing

Reviewer: I think we need a different term here

  function declarations to external APIs, the names of these declarations must stay unchanged. This 
  change enables quantum compilation passes to generate calls to external APIs.
  [(#2244)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2244)

* Fixed a bug where Catalyst was incorrectly raising an error about a missing shots parameter
  on devices that support analytical execution.
  [(#2281)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2281)

* Fixed a bug where ``qml.vjp`` and ``qml.jvp`` were not working with Autograph.
  [(#2345)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2345)

<h3>Internal changes ⚙️</h3>

* Catalyst now features a unified compilation framework, which will enable users and developers to 
  design and implement compilation passes in Python *in addition to* C++, acting on the same 
  Catalyst IR. The Python interface relies on the `xDSL library <https://xdsl.dev/>` to represent 
  and manipulate programs (analogous to the MLIR library in C++). As a result, transformations can 
  be quickly prototyped, easily debugged, and dynamically integrated into Catalyst without changes 

>   to the compiled Catalyst package.

Reviewer: Hmm, documentation is definitely a good point. Just weird to have a whole new feature / module in the section that is meant for refactors or smaller changes without measurable user impact.

  [(#2201)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2201)

<h3>Deprecations 👋</h3>

No deprecations have been made in this release.

<h3>Bug fixes 🐛</h3>

* Updated the type support for callbacks allowing for the use of unsigned integers.
  [(#2330)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2330)

* Fixed a bug where the ``qec.ppr`` op attribute ``rotation_kind`` was not correctly constrained to
  be one of ``±1``, ``±2``, ``±4``, or ``±8``. Also, for the identity Pauli product, the 
  ``rotation_kind`` was correctly set to ``1``, instead of ``0``.
  [(#2344)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2344)

* Updated tests and the PennyLane dependency pin to follow changes introduced by
  [PennyLaneAI/pennylane#8290](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8290).
  [(#2286)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2286)

* Updated ``catalyst.python_interface.inspection.xdsl_conversion.get_mlir_module`` to
  no longer explicitly use the xDSL pass plugin, which was causing an issue with the new ``specs``
  functionality introduced in this release. 
  [(#2303)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2303)

> * Added missing ``detensorize-function-boundary`` and ``symbol-dce`` passes to ``Pipelines.cpp``.

Author: What's the benefit of this?

Author: ```suggestion
* Running the Catalyst compiler from the command line no longer misses the ``detensorize-function-boundary`` and ``symbol-dce`` passes.
```

How's this?

  // ... use %4
  ```

* Fixed an issue with :func:`~.passes.commute_ppr` and :func:`~.passes.merge_ppr_ppm` where they
  were incorrectly moving nullary operations. This also improves the compilation time by reducing
  the sort function by explicitly passing the operations that need to be sorted.
  [(#2200)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2200)

> * Fixed a bug that was causing compilation passes to not apply when using ``mcm_method="one-shot"``.

Reviewer 2: Yes! This is correct (and much better wording)

<h3>Documentation 📝</h3>

* A clarification was made in the :doc:`Sharp Bits page <../dev/sharp_bits>` for the behaviour of 
  :func:`qml.allocate <~.allocate>` when used with Catalyst.
  [(#2317)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2317)

* A typo in the code example for :func:`~.passes.ppr_to_ppm` has been corrected.
  [(#2136)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2136)

* Fixed a rendering issue in ``catalyst.qjit`` and `catalyst.CompileOptions` docstrings.
  [(#2156)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2156)

* Updated the MLIR Plugins documentation stating that plugins require adding passes via 
  ``--pass-pipeline``.
  [(#2168)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2168)

* Typos in the docstrings for ``PPRotationArbitraryOp`` and ``PPRRotationOp`` have been corrected.
  [(#2297)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/2297)

> <h3>Contributors ✍️</h3>

Author: TODO: carve out dedicated section for external contributions / community contributions

Author: nvm, this will go in the blog

Ali Asadi,
Joey Carter,
Yushao Chen,
Isaac De Vlugt,

> Sengthai Heng,

Author: ```suggestion
Sengthai Heng,
David Ittah,
```

‼️
